Hi and welcome to the class on
multivariable regression examples.
Let's start this discussion
with a famous dataset
from a well known statistics text book,
which is this Swiss Fertility Data.
And it's in the data sets package so
I want to do require(datasets).
And then I wanna do data(swiss), and
then if you do ?swiss,
it'll bring up the help file.
I have kind of a better formatted
version of this on the slide.
And so what's in this data set is
a standardized fertility measure and some
socio-economic status indicators for 47
French speaking provinces of Switzerland.
And this is from 1888.
So the variables are fertility,
agriculture, which is the percentage of
the males involved in agriculture as an
occupation, and examination the percentage
of draftees that scored a particular mark
on a military examination in the province.
Education is the percent of the population
that made it beyond primary school,
Catholic is, in this region at this time,
is just the percent Catholic
as opposed to Protestant.
And infant mortality is the percentage of
live births who live less than one year
from the province.
So that's the data set, and
we're interested in looking into what
explains fertility in this province.
So, before we go any further, let's do
some basic scatter plots of the data.
So let me load the Swiss data set and
do a Paris plot of all
the variables in the data set.
Oops, I forgot my r, there we go.
And this library here,
GGally or G-G-Ally I
think is probably how it's pronounced, is
a collection of add-on tools for ggplot.
In particular they have a ggpairs
command that does an equivalent
of the rpairs plot, and
I think you'll see it here.
In a second,
you'll understand what it does.
It's a little bit of a slow plot.
Let me zoom in on the plot here, and
now, what you see is, for example,
fertility is on the x-axis for
all the plots in this first column.
Agriculture is on the x-axis,
or the horizontal axis, for
all of the plots in this column, and
it's on the vertical y-axis on this plot.
So hopefully, you see how it works.
So examination, for example,
is on the y-axis for these two plots, and
then on the x-axis for
these three plots, and so on.
The corresponding upper
triangular part of this matrix
gives the correlation
between those two variables.
So let's take, for example,
fertility and agriculture.
Here's the scatter plot,
you see it right here.
Here is the which turns out to
be fairly linear in this case.
And a confidence prediction,
confidence band around it.
And it suggests that
the correlation between the two,
the empirical correlation, is 0.35.
So let's, in the next subsequent slides,
investigate the relationship
where agriculture,
the percent of the province that works in
the agricultural industry, with fertility.
Let's fit our fertility as an outcome, and
the first model I want to fit includes
all of the variables as predictors, and
I'm doing this more for illustration,
than I am to mimic a real data analysis.
I would say in a real data analysis,
your first model would probably be
fertility with agriculture by itself.
Or the marginal relationship of interest
without considering the other variables.
But I just wanna show you how to
fit all of the variables at once.
So if you do fertility tilde period,
this period then adds
all of the other variables in linearly,
no square terms or anything like that,
no interaction terms, all of the remaining
variables in the data frame all at once.
Saying data equals Swiss
tells it that the data set that
I want is the Swiss data set.
So that's the run of my LM, and notice,
you often want to assign the output
of your LM to a variable so
you can save it later, but this runs quick
enough that I'm just printing the output.
Now, summary of the output from LM
gives a much more interesting output,
and then in particular, it gives you
this table of all the coefficients.
Their standard errors, their t values,
and their p values, but
it also gives you a lot
of other information.
If you just wanna grab
that coefficient table,
you can do $ coefficient on
the output of the summary statement.
And there's just the table by itself.
So for example, if you want to
use that in some subsequent code.
So let's focus on this number, -0.17.
This number is interpreted
as the following.
We expect a 0.17 decrease,
now decrease because it's negative, right?
Okay, so we expect a 0.17 decrease
in standardized fertility for
every 1% increase in the percentage
of males involved in agriculture,
holding the other variables constant.
So that is interpreted as
we hold examination and
education, percent Catholic and
infant mortality constant.
This next column, the standard error 0.07,
talks about how precise that variable is.
Oh, and before I move on,
I should also mention it's
important to note that the percent
agriculture is expressed as a percentage
rather than a proportion, right?
Because a percentage is the proportion
times 100, so it would change
the scale of the coefficient by a factor
of 100 so it's important to note
whether or not these numbers
are percentages or proportions,
that would make a big difference
in the scale of the coefficient.
Okay, so the standard error talks
about how precise this coefficient is.
It talks about the statistical variability
of that coefficient, and we get a 0.07.
If we wanted to perform a hypothesis test,
that the coefficient for
agriculture, beta Agri is what
I have here on the slide.
If we want to test whether not that's
zero, then we would take the estimate,
subtract off the hypothesized value,
which in this case is zero, and divide it
by the standard error of the estimate.
So the t statistic is nothing
other than the estimate divided by
the standard error.
We can do that of course, but
r very conveniently goes ahead and
gives it to us.
It's -2.448, but that's simply obtained
by dividing -0.17 divided by 0.07.
That t statistic,
we can calculate the probability of
getting a t statistic as extreme as that.
As small as negative 2.448 or smaller, and
because we're doing a two-sided test,
we would double that p value.
So you can go through that t
calculation if you'd like.
The degrees of freedom are n
minus the number of coefficients,
including the intercept.
But again, r does that on our behalf,
and that works out to be 0.018.
So by standard thresholding rules,
type one error rate of say 5%,
that would be statistically significant.
But let's go through some other models and
look at how the process of model
selection changes our estimates.
So now let's contrast the model with
a model having just agriculture
in as a predictor.
So the previous model had all of our other
variables in this predictor, let's look
at one that just looks at this association
between fertility and agriculture.
So, I'm running it and I'm just
grabbing the coefficient tables so
we're not looking at
the rest of the r's output.
But when you do this on your own,
you'll look at the rest of
this summary output from LM.
What's interesting is that the agriculture
variable is about the same magnitude,
0.19 instead of 0.17.
However, it's changed signs.
Instead of agriculture having
a negative effect on fertility,
it has a positive effect on fertility.
So, adjusting for
these other variables changes
the actual direction of the effect
of agriculture on fertility.
And this is the impact of something
so-called Simpson's Paradox.
Or I just think it should be called
Simpson's Perceived Paradox,
because there's nothing paradoxical about
the possibility that accounting for
other variables should change
the nature of the relationship
between a predictor and a response.
It actually makes quite a bit of
sense that that would be the case.
Notice of course,
in both cases the agriculture coefficient
is strongly statistically significant.
So what I'd like to do in the next
slide is just create via simulation,
an example where an effect
can reverse itself.
So that maybe it'll get us thinking
about how this could happen.
In the end,
regression is gonna be a dynamic process,
where you're going to have to think
about what variables to include.
And you're going to have to make the kind
of scientific arguments, if you want.
If there hasn't been randomization to
protect you from confounding, you're gonna
have to go through a scientific dynamic
process of putting confounders in and
out and thinking about what they're
doing to your effective interest
in order to evaluate it.
So let's invent a little simulation,
just to illustrate how this can happen.
But there's a variety of ways it
can happen, and this is just one.
But let's just, so you can see it
happen as we code it from a real
generating process where
you can control everything.
So I'm gonna assume that I have
100 data points, n is 100,
and then my second regressor, x2,
is just gonna be the values 1 to n.
So if you look at x2, it's just 1 to 100.
So think of x2 as something that we
might measure regularly, like days, so
we measured 100 consecutive days.
And then x1 is a variable that depends
on x2 and it depends on random noise.
So let's just make something up.
So x1 depends linearly on x2,
so it grows linearly with time.
So let's say, maybe,
hopefully x1 is your bank account.
It's your money,
it goes up with time linearly.
And then there's all these random
fluctuations that impact your spending, so
your money doesn't necessarily
always just go up.
It goes up and down sporadically, but
there's this linear trend of it going up.
Okay so there's my x1 and
it's gonna look different, right?
So if I were to, for example, plot x1,
it goes up but it's got all this
random noise around the line.
Okay now y, let's say y is happiness.
So measure of happiness.
So what happens with y?
The true generating model is y is
negatively associated with x1.
Uh-oh, so you're happiness is
negatively associated with your money.
I guess mo' money,
mo' problems is what that's suggesting.
But then it's positively associated
with x2, so it goes up with time and
down with excellent.
And this is the, and
then there's some random normal noise.
And this the correct model because
we're using it for simulation.
So we know that it's the actual truth.
Y, our outcome that we're simulating,
depends negatively on x1 with
a coefficient of minus 1, and
depends positively on x2 with
a coefficient of plus 1.
Okay, so let's simulate our y.
And now let's see what happens
if we fit x1 by itself.
And what we see is we get this enormous
coefficient, 95, which is clearly wrong.
It's nothing near to the negative
1 that it's supposed to be or
that we would hope it would be.
It's in fact quite the opposite.
And what's happening, it's sort of
picking up this residual effect of x2,
this big line, this big component
of x2 that's a big driver of y,
is getting picked up in x1.
Okay, but now what happens if we fit
the correct model, x1 and x2, together.
Well, there we get
the correct coefficients,
about minus 1 for x1, and
about minus 1 for x2.
So there you can see,
if you do the correct sort of adjustment,
then it should work out.
And you can imagine why this would happen.
What is regression doing?
It's taking x1 and
removing the linear effect of x2.
So this part right here,
this 0.01 x2 should get removed and
that uniform noise, that's the correct
part of x1 that's unrelated to x2,
will get related to the part of y
that's unrelated to x2 as well.
So, let's do some plots to highlight this,
just to show us how it works a little bit.
So I'm gonna create a data frame,
because ggplot likes data frames,
and I can't remember if I loaded ggplots,
so let me reload it.
And then my plot is gonna have this data,
dat.
And the aesthetic,
I named my variables conveniently y.
And then my x variable is gonna be x1.
So the kind of important variable, x1.
And then my color is gonna be x2, okay?
And then I want my points and
I want the line.
I didn't highlight the whole thing.
There we go.
And then I actually need to
plot my plot so there's my g.
So there it is.
So you can see the color gradient.
Here is x1 as it relates to y.
And you can see the line that
it's fitting is not incorrect.
There is a clear linear relationship,
positive linear relationship,
between the x1 and y.
However, you can see,
with x2, which is the color,
that there's also this
clear positive gradient.
As y goes up, so does x2.
And also you can see as x1 goes up,
so does x2.
So you can see the sort of
confounding that's happening here.
So why don't we now see what happens
if we plot the residuals, okay.
So I created in my data frame, I created
the residuals where I fit x2 on y.
And then I took the residual
where I removed x2 from x1.
So let's see what happens
when we do the residual plot.
So this should be a plot that would
give the slope of this line will be
the coefficient from our linear model
fit where we include both x1 and x2.
Okay, so I'm gonna run that.
I'm not gonna go through the ggplot
commands, cuz they're basically the same.
And here's the plot.
Now you can see that for
the residual y and
the residual x1, there's a clear negative
linear relationship, and if you stare at
it enough, you realize that the slope of
this line should be around negative 1.
And, you can see that the x2 variable
is clearly not related to
the residual x1 variable.
Okay, and so
that's what linear models is doing.
It's removing the x2 from both x1 and y.
And that's why you get this sorta correct
relationship when you fit both variables.
Now this doesn't mean that throwing every
variable into your regression model is
the right thing to do.
There's consequences to
throwing in extra variables,
unnecessary variables,
into your regression relationship.
Let's go back to our data set now
that we've thought about the idea of
multi-variable regression
a little bit more.
Remember our agriculture effect reversed
itself after we included the other
variables in the model.
And particularly you'll find that this
happens quite a bit when education and
examination are included.
So educational attainment is negatively
correlated with the percent working
in agriculture, a correlation of -0.64.
And you would kind of expect that,
given where the data was collected and
the time period in which it was collected.
And in addition,
as I mentioned earlier, education and
examination are kind of
measuring the same thing.
Their correlation,
those two variables is 0.7.
They're sort of measuring the same thing.
So the question arises, is this a positive
association between agriculture and
fertility by itself when done
via ordinary linear regression?
Is that artifactual for not having
accounted for these other variables?
Education, by the way,
does have a stronger effect on fertility.
So at the bare minimum, anyone claiming
that they did a linear regression with
percent of the province working on
agriculture, and fertility is the outcome.
And claimed a causal relationship
between agriculture and fertility,
causal positive relationship, that
conclusion would definitely be suspect.
First of all because from observational
data like this, it's always suspect
to make strong causal conclusions without
putting a lot of extra work in and
thought about your assumptions.
But even if you were just willing to claim
an association between agriculture and
fertility, that also would be suspect,
because you can so
easily break that association and
reverse it by the inclusion of other,
very reasonable variables.
I also wanted to show you really
quickly what happens if you include
a completely unnecessary
variable in the model.
And what I mean by completely
unnecessary is that,
what if you include a variable that is
simply a linear combination of the other
variables that you've already included.
So you might include a variable
that's unnecessary but
is random noise, for example.
And that's a different issue,
we'll talk about that later.
But right now, why don't we see what
happens if we include a variable,
that in what I am describing,
is completely unnecessary.
So, for example,
if I create this variable z,
that's nothing other than agriculture
plus education, added together.
Well that has no added value.
We've already included education and
we've already included
agriculture in our joint model.
So why don't I show you what happens
when you fit all of the variables
plus this additional variable z.
And what you see is our agriculture
coefficient hasn't changed,
it's -0.17 just like before.
And our z variable is giving a NA.
And so, whatever it does, whatever r does,
is it takes the last sort of completely
unnecessary variable included in the model
and gives that one an NA coefficient.
So that's an important thing to remember
if you see an NA in r after you
fit a linear model, then probably
the most likely culprit is you've
included a variable that
is either numerically or
exactly a linear combination
of the other variables.